Hi from Tokyo Japan, and welcome to Jeremy’s
IT Lab. In this section of our CCNA course,
we’ll cover the Spanning Tree Protocol
toolkit: a set of optional features that
you can use to modify and enhance Spanning Tree
Protocol. This first video starts with PortFast,
a handy feature that lets a switch
port skip the STP Listening and
Learning states and immediately start
forwarding data when it’s connected.
Here’s what we’ll cover. This video and
the next few will cover the STP toolkit.
Starting with PortFast in this video, which
allows switch ports connected to end hosts
to immediately enter the STP Forwarding state,
bypassing listening and learning. This lets the
hosts start communicating over the network as
soon as they connect – no need to wait. Cisco
expects you to know four other features
in the STP toolkit as well: BPDU Guard,
BPDU Filter, Root Guard, and Loop Guard. Feel
free to read these descriptions if you want,
but we’ll cover them in the next few videos of
the course. So let’s get started with PortFast.
First of all, what exactly is the problem
that PortFast solves? Let’s connect this
PC and switch to find out. When an end host
connects to a switch port like this the port
becomes up/up but can’t send or receive data yet.
By up/up I mean the status of the port in SHOW IP
INTERFACE BRIEF, as you can see here.
The switch’s G0/1 interface is up/up,
but any frames the PC tries to send are
discarded by the switch. And why is that? Well,
it’s an STP designated port but will take a total
of 30 seconds before it enters the forwarding
state. That is 15 seconds in the listening state,
and 15 seconds in the learning state. This leads
to a poor user experience. The user expects
to be able to access the network immediately,
but for some reason it doesn’t work. The user
probably doesn’t even know STP exists. They
don’t have any reason to know it. They just
know the “the internet doesn’t work” for 30
seconds when they connect their computer. And
that’s frustrating. And worst of all, this wait
is totally unnecessary, because there is no risk
of a Layer 2 loop occurring between a switch and
a PC. Loops can occur between switches because
of how they flood frames, but PCs don’t do that.
Let’s check out the process on a real
switch. Notice after I connect the cable
into port 1 on this Cisco Catalyst switch,
the link light above it turns on. Each port
on a switch has a light like this, called a
link light, to indicate its status. The two
blinking green lights on the bottom right
indicate that those two ports are active,
and are sending and receiving data. But the link
light for port 1, which I just connected to my PC,
is blinking an amber color. This means the
port is up and receiving data from my PC,
but the data is blocked by STP. My PC can’t access
the network yet. Finally, after 30 seconds, the
light turns green, meaning it is in the Forwarding
state and is ready to send and receive data.
Now that we’ve seen the problem, let’s see how
PortFast solves it. Once again, I’ll connect this
PC to the switch. When PortFast is configured
on a port, it immediately enters the Forwarding
state when connected to another device – when
the port is enabled. So, it bypasses listening
and learning, and can send and receive data right
away without waiting 30 seconds. This obviously
provides a much better user experience: the
user’s device can immediately access the network.
Let’s see PortFast in action on a real switch.
This time I’ve enabled it on port 1 of my switch,
so let’s connect the cable. And as you can see,
the link light turns green right away – the port
is in the STP forwarding state and can send and
receive data immediately. No more 30 second wait.
So, how can we configure PortFast? It’s quite
simple, but there are two ways to do it. The
first is in interface config mode with the command
SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST. This enables PortFast only
on the individual interface: the interface you
configured this command on. But you can also
enable it in global config mode with SPANNING-TREE
PORTFAST DEFAULT. Instead of enabling PortFast on
an individual port, this enables PortFast
on all access ports. In most cases,
this will enable PortFast on all connections
to end hosts, but not on connections to other
switches. This is because connections between
switches are almost always trunk links, since most
modern LANs use multiple VLANs. But connections
to end hosts are almost always access links,
since most hosts don’t need to send and receive
traffic in multiple VLANs. As we’ll cover in a
minute, it’s very important that you don’t enable
PortFast on ports that connect to other switches.
Let’s try that first method in the CLI.
I entered interface config mode for G0/1
and used SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST to enable
PortFast. When you enable PortFast, you’ll
see this warning message. This is related to the
point I just mentioned in the previous slide,
so I’ll read it out. “PortFast should only be
enabled on ports connected to a single host.
Connecting hubs, concentrators, switches, bridges,
etc... to this interface when portfast is enabled,
can cause temporary bridging loops. Use with
CAUTION”. Basically, this means that PortFast
should not be configured on ports connected to
switches, or temporary Layer 2 loops can occur.
The entire point of the listening and learning
states is to make 100% sure there are no loops
in the LAN before a port moves to the forwarding
state. Because PortFast bypasses those states and
makes the port start in the forwarding state,
it can cause a temporary loop if you enable it
on connections to other switches. So, just
remember that PortFast shouldn’t be enabled
on ports that connect to other switches. Okay,
in addition to that warning another message is
shown here. "Portfast has been configured on
GigabitEthernet0/1 but will only have effect
when the interface is in a non-trunking mode”.
So, even if you configure SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST
on a trunk port, it won’t be active. By
default, it only works on access ports.
Okay, after configuring PortFast on
the port, I used SHOW SPANNING-TREE
INTERFACE G0/1 DETAIL to confirm. Here’s the
command syntax. SHOW SPANNING-TREE INTERFACE,
followed by the interface name, and then DETAIL.
And here’s the output of the command. Notice the
line I highlighted. “The port is in the portfast
edge mode”. This requires a bit of explanation.
There are two kinds of PortFast, edge and network.
PortFast edge is the kind we are covering in this
video. PortFast network is used for a feature
called Bridge Assurance, which is not a CCNA
topic. So, don’t worry about it. I just wanted
to clarify the meaning of “edge” in this output.
Next, let’s try the second configuration method:
enabling PortFast by default in global config
mode. I’ve expanded the example network a bit.
SW1 and SW2 are connected by their G0/0 and G0/1
ports, which are trunks, and their G0/2 and
3 ports are connected to hosts, so they are
access ports. I’m only showing SW1’s CLI here,
but on both switches I configured SPANNING-TREE
PORTFAST DEFAULT. Just like before, a warning
message appears. Let’s read it. ”%Warning:
this command enables portfast by default
on all interfaces. You should now disable
portfast explicitly on switched ports leading
to hubs, switches and bridges as they may create
temporary bridging loops”. Let me clarify the
part I highlighted. It says “all interfaces”,
but as I mentioned before it only activates
PortFast on all access ports, not trunk ports.
So this warning message is a bit misleading. Now,
if you want to disable PortFast on a specific
access port after enabling it by default, you can
use the command SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST DISABLE in
interface config mode. You should do this if
you connect two switches with an access link,
but that’s rare: connections between switches
are usually trunks. Okay, here’s that same SHOW
command I used before, looking at the output for
SW1’s G0/2 interface, an access port. It says “the
port is in the portfast edge mode by default”.
So, PortFast has been enabled on these four ports,
the access ports connected to end hosts. And what
about the trunks connecting the switches? I used
the same command for SW1’s G0/1 interface,
and it doesn’t mention PortFast anywhere. So,
PortFast isn’t enabled on the trunk ports.
The key point to remember here is that, when
you enable PortFast in global config mode, it is
only activated on access ports, not trunk ports.
We’ve covered how to configure PortFast on
access ports. Now let’s cover the topic of
PortFast on trunk ports, because there are some
situations where it’s valid. The standard PortFast
configuration commands only enable PortFast
on access ports. Those are the commands we
just covered. SPANNING-TREE PORFAST in interface
config mode and SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST DEFAULT in
global config mode. But in some cases you might
want to enable PortFast on a trunk port. The
network diagram above shows two examples. First
is a port connected to a virtualization server
with virtual machines, VMs, in different VLANs.
Virtualization is a CCNA topic, but we’ll cover
it later in the course. For now, just know that
servers using virtualization often use trunk links
to connect to switches, instead of access links
like most end hosts. And the second example is a
port connected to a router via router-on-a-stick.
As we covered in the VLAN section of the course,
router-on-a-stick is basically a trunk link
between a switch and a router. A router doesn’t
flood frames like a switch, and it won’t cause
layer 2 loops. So, you can configure PortFast
on interfaces connected to a router like this. So,
how do we actually configure PortFast on a trunk?
It can only be configured per-port in interface
config mode. The command is SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST
TRUNK. Let’s see an example in the CLI. The
command shows the same message we saw before,
warning that PortFast shouldn’t be enabled on
ports connected to switches. And here’s SHOW
SPANNING-TREE INTERFACE DETAIL, only showing
the relevant line since there’s no space. It
says “The port is in portfast edge trunk mode”.
In most CCNA scenarios you will only need to
enable PortFast on access ports, but just keep in
mind that it can also be enabled on trunk ports.
Finally, before we finish up, I want to briefly
clarify ‘PortFast edge’, which I mentioned
earlier. To review, there are two PortFast modes:
PortFast edge and PortFast network. PortFast
network isn’t a CCNA topic, so we’re covering
PortFast edge only. In modern Cisco switches,
if you use the commands covered in this lecture,
the device will automatically add the EDGE keyword
to the configuration. So for example, if you
configure SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST on a port,
in the running-config it will become SPANNING-TREE
PORTFAST EDGE. If you configure SPANNING-TREE
PORTFAST TRUNK, it will become SPANNING-TREE
PORTFAST EDGE TRUNK. And if you configure
SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST DEFAULT, it will become
SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST EDGE DEFAULT in the
running-config. You can use either version
of the commands when configuring PortFast;
it doesn’t matter. The end result is the same:
EDGE will always be added in the configuration.
As you probably guessed, if you want to
configure PortFast network instead of edge,
you have to specify the NETWORK keyword in the
commands, like SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST NETWORK. I
also mentioned the command SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST
DISABLE before, but just note that it doesn’t use
the EDGE keyword. It’s an exception. Okay, let’s
verify the EDGE keyword in the CLI. I configured
SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST on SW1’s G0/1 interface. I
then used SHOW RUNNING-CONFIG INTERFACE G0/1. This
is a handy command. You can use it to view the
running-config for just the specified interface,
instead of the device’s entire running-config. But
unfortunately it doesn’t work in packet tracer.
Anyway here is the interface’s config. Notice that
the switch automatically added the EDGE keyword to
the end of the command, even though I only
configured SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST. Okay,
to summarize, just be aware that the
type of PortFast covered in the CCNA,
the one we’re talking about in this video, is
called PortFast Edge. For the CCNA exam, you
should probably be aware of both versions of these
commands: with and without EDGE. Their effect is
the same. But keep in mind that if you’re doing
labs in Packet Tracer, the current version doesn’t
support the EDGE keyword. So don’t be confused if
you try it in packet tracer and it doesn’t work.
Here’s a summary of the main points covered in
this video. When a host connects to a switch port,
by default it takes 30 seconds before the
port can send or receive data. And this can
be frustrating for users, who don’t know why
they can’t connect. PortFast allows a switch
port to immediately enter the STP forwarding
state, bypassing listening and learning. So,
the connected host can access the network right
away, making a much better experience for the
user. PortFast can be configured in two ways.
The first is in interface config mode with the
SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST command, optionally
with the EDGE keyword. This enables PortFast
only on the individual interface, and is only
active when the interface is in access mode,
not trunk mode. The second option is in global
config mode with SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST DEFAULT,
which enables PortFast on all access ports. If
necessary, you can then disable it on specific
ports with SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST DISABLE. Just
remember that PortFast should not be configured
on ports connected to a switch, as it can cause
temporary loops. It should only be used on ports
connected to end hosts, or maybe a router. And
keep in mind you can also configure PortFast
on a trunk port with SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST
TRUNK. This can be useful for router-on-a-stick
or when connecting to a virtualization
server with VMs in different VLANs. And
that’s all for this video about PortFast.
I hope it was helpful. Thanks for watching.